feat(blog): notifications in Terraform and IaC automation (#48)
masterpointio/masterpoint.io: content/updates/importance-of-efficient-notifications-terraform-automation.md

image: /img/updates/efficient-notifications-terraform-automation/terraform-automation-notifications.png
callout: <p>👋 <b>If you're ready to take your infrastructure to the next level, we're here to help. We love to work together with engineering teams to help them build well-documented, scalable, automated IaC that make their jobs easier. <a href='/contact'>Get in touch!</a></p>
---

<h2>Table of Contents</h2>

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [The Silent Failure Problem in IaC Deployments](#the-silent-failure-problem-in-iac-deployments)
- [Notifications](#notifications)
- [Alert Fatigue](#alert-fatigue)
- [Targeted Deployment Notifications](#targeted-deployment-notifications)
- [Spacelift’s Infrastructure as Code Terraform CI/CD Automation](#spacelifts-infrastructure-as-code-terraform-cicd-automation)
- [Open Sourcing our Spacelift Notification Policy Template](#open-sourcing-our-spacelift-notification-policy-template)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Introduction

> In the world of [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) and [OpenTofu](https://opentofu.org/) (collectively referred to as “TF” in this post) and Infrastructure as Code (IaC), there are times where the CI/CD pipeline or automation fail to deploy IaC changes. Failures could occur due to the code errors, cloud provider resource constraints, authentication issues, state & locking conflict, transient provider or network disruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the world of [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/) and [OpenTofu](https://opentofu.org/) (collectively referred to as “TF” in this post) and Infrastructure as Code (IaC), there are times where the CI/CD pipeline or automation fails to deploy IaC changes. Failures could occur due to the code errors, cloud provider resource constraints, authentication issues, state & locking conflict, transient provider or network disruptions.
```

Because there are so many factors involved in cloud infrastructure, there’s more possibility for failed TF applies – such failures are acceptable and can easily be addressed with simple follow-up changes or reruns.

> But do you know what’s way worse than a failed TF deployment? A deployment failure that doesn’t get noticed **for days**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But do you know what’s way worse than a failed TF deployment? A deployment failure that doesn’t get noticed **for days**.

In this article, we'll talk through this problem and share how we believe it should be handled. We'll include specifics on how we do this today with [Spacelift](https://spacelift.io/) for our clients. 
```

## The Silent Failure Problem in IaC Deployments

> When infrastructure deployments fail, they often do so quietly. They can go unnoticed if there are no alerting set up -- particularly in those projects still relying on manual TF executions from local machines rather than in an IaC automation pipeline, where the failure remains on that individual’s machine and is invisible to others. It leaves the [root modules](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/modules/#the-root-module)' TF changes and modifications in an unapplied or failed state, until another change/TF operation reveals them. Without a centralized alerting system, there’s no guarantee it will be properly addressed or even communicated, delaying resolutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When infrastructure deployments fail, they often do so quietly. They can go unnoticed if there is no alerting set up -- particularly in those projects still relying on manual TF executions from local machines rather than in an IaC automation pipeline, where the failure remains on that individual’s machine and is invisible to others. It leaves the [root modules](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/modules/#the-root-module)' TF changes and modifications in an unapplied or failed state, until another change/TF operation reveals them. Without a centralized alerting system, there’s no guarantee it will be properly addressed or even communicated, delaying resolutions.
```

* **Wasted engineering time** - Developers waste time days after the failure investigating issues that could’ve been more easily diagnosed on the spot.

## Notifications

When teams first encounter the silent failure problem in IaC deployments, the common initial solution is straightforward: set up basic notifications. In the automation pipeline, on failures, it would capture the error and send a Slack/Microsoft Teams message into the corresponding channel for the team responsible for the TF code.

Notifications bring awareness of problems as early as possible for someone to look into and address. Without such notifications, failures are invisible until they cascade into larger problems.

## Alert Fatigue

But often solutions create their own problems. When in a large infrastructure team environment with  hundreds of root modules and components, another problem comes up with notifications: alert fatigue. [Alert fatigue](https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/best-practices-to-prevent-alert-fatigue) isn’t unique to TF infrastructure automation – it’s a universal challenge that affects all alerting and notification systems.

> When every TF Apply that fails pings everyone in the channel with an universal tag such as `@everyone` or `@here`, notifications quickly become background noise. Teams become desensitized to constant alerts and critical failures (load balancer modifications failing and affecting traffic routing) might get drowned out with minor issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When every TF Apply that fails pings everyone in the channel with an universal tag such as `@everyone` or `@here`, notifications quickly become background noise. Teams become desensitized to constant alerts and critical failures (for example, load balancer modifications failing and affecting traffic routing) might get drowned out with minor issues.
```

    * It's important to note that this is NOT blaming the author, especially since TF Apply errors can be common. Rather, this is proactive, ensuring that the failure notification reaches the person most capable of resolving the issue efficiently.
2. Provides rich contextual information by including links to the failed run and the specific code that caused it, as well as additional relevant information from the Spacelift policy data inputs mentioned above, such as identifying who the change is associated with.
3. Implements deduplication so repeated issues such as identical root module failures don’t create a flood of redundant notifications. This is especially important on GitHub Pull Requests where notifications (comments in the GitHub PR context) can be [updated in-place](https://docs.spacelift.io/concepts/policy/notification-policy#updating-an-existing-pull-request-comment).
4. Uses multiple notification channels for different failure priority levels. Critical resource issues (e.g. production related infrastructure deployments) deserve different treatment than minor sandbox environment failures.

> Below is a simple targeted notification example -- with different use cases in different organizations, the actual messaging and content will vary greatly to suit what different teams need to best address their needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is a simple targeted notification example -- with different use cases in different organizations, the actual messaging and content will vary greatly to suit what different teams require to best address their needs.
```

But do you know what’s way worse than a failed TF deployment? A deployment failure that doesn’t get noticed **for days**.

## The Silent Failure Problem in IaC Deployments

When infrastructure deployments fail, they often do so quietly. They can go unnoticed if there are no alerting set up (particularly in those projects still relying on manual TF executions from local machines rather than in a CI/CD pipeline, where the failure remains on that individual’s machine and is invisible to others), leaving TF changes and modifications in an unapplied or failed state  until a routine check or another change reveals them. Without a centralized alerting system, there’s no guarantee it will be properly addressed or even communicated, delaying resolutions.

This is especially true in large IaC codebases or large TF monorepos where there are hundreds of root modules. The CI/CD system dutifully reports the failure, but the failure slips through the cracks because of many deployment pipelines running concurrently due to the sheer number of root modules.

<!-- MATT TO DOUBLE REVIEW THIS POINT -->

> At Masterpoint, we’ve observed this problem repeatedly across many of our clients when performing infrastructure audits and implementations or ongoing managed service provider (MSP) relationships. As organizations’ infrastructure scales and complexity grows, the likelihood of these silent failures increase dramatically which undermines infrastructure reliability.

Author: @Gowiem

Reviewer: I think this is fine 👍

> At Masterpoint, we’ve observed this problem repeatedly across many of our clients when performing infrastructure audits and implementations or ongoing managed service provider (MSP) relationships. As organizations’ infrastructure scales and complexity grows, the likelihood of these silent failures increase dramatically which undermines infrastructure reliability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Masterpoint, we’ve observed this problem repeatedly across many of our clients when performing infrastructure audits, implementations, and ongoing managed service provider (MSP) relationships. As an organizations’ infrastructure scales and complexity grows, the likelihood of these silent failures increase which undermines infrastructure reliability.
```

This is particularly problematic in organizations with large cloud infrastructure footprints managed by IaC – notifications are usually important to someone, but **when everyone on the team gets every notification, they are noticed by none**.

## Targeted Deployment Notifications

When we encountered alert fatigue and saw teams getting bogged down with too many notifications that might not be relevant to the appropriate engineer, we understood that we needed to make our notifications and alerts both precise and actionable. The approach of broadcasting all failures to an entire global channel was clearly ineffective. The notifications should tie the TF failed apply to the specific team. More specifically, where appropriate, the notifications should be tied to the engineer that made the code change. They are most likely the person best suited for handling the issue and has the most context

> ![Pinging ALL vs individual for Notifications](/img/updates/efficient-notifications-terraform-automation/spacelift-notifications-ping.png)

Author: updated

2. Provides rich contextual information by including links to the failed run and the specific code that caused it, as well as additional relevant information from the Spacelift policy data inputs mentioned above, such as identifying who the change is associated with.
3. Implements deduplication so repeated issues such as identical root module failures don’t create a flood of redundant notifications. This is especially important on GitHub Pull Requests where notifications (comments in the GitHub PR context) can be [updated in-place](https://docs.spacelift.io/concepts/policy/notification-policy#updating-an-existing-pull-request-comment).
4. Uses multiple notification channels for different failure priority levels. Critical resource issues (e.g. production related infrastructure deployments) deserve different treatment than minor sandbox environment failures.

Below is a simple targeted notification example -- with different use cases in different organizations, the actual messaging and content will vary greatly to suit what different teams need to best address their needs.

> ![Spacelift Console UI with the Notification Policy Template](/img/updates/efficient-notifications-terraform-automation/simple-targeted-notification-example.jpg)

Reviewer: @oycyc here is a different screenshot that isn't as redacted. As long as @westonplatter is good with this, let's use this. 
![Slack 2025-03-13 13 40 01](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b2507dfc-ee42-4f45-bf30-7b4f493586b2)

---
visible: true
draft: false
title: "Importance of Efficient Notifications in Terraform & IaC Automation"
author: Yangci Ou
slug: importance-of-efficient-notifications-terraform-automation

> date: 2025-03-99 # TODO TBD, placeholder for testing in preview

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2025-04-01
```
